# Mechanical Engineering Case Study - Flight Simulator Wind Speed

## Problem Identification and Statement
The objective of this software is to generate a computer simulation of wind speed for a flight
simulator. The program extracts data from a file containing various parameters like average
wind speed, gust value, etc., that are essential for computing the wind simulation. The software
also incorporates the simulation of storms and further microbursts during the storm. The
program finally outputs several files containing information about wind speed, storms, and
microbursts. A final wind simulation file is also generated which compiles all the information.

## Gathering of Information and Input/Output Description
### Relevant Information
The wind speed for a particular region can be modelled by using an average value and a gust
value that is added to the average. For example, the wind speed might be 10 miles per hour,
with added noise (which represents gusts) of 5 miles per hour, the wind speed would be a value
between 5 and 15 (10 ±5). The wind speed is a random number between the (average speed +
gust value) and the (average speed - gust value).

The wind speed simulation also includes storm simulation. Storms are characterized by higher
magnitude wind speeds for a particular duration of time. Storms are generated based on a
probability Pstorm for a random time duration between maximum and minimum storm duration
and with a random magnitude between maximum and minimum storm amplitude.

The storm simulation also includes a simulation of microbursts. Microbursts are characterized
by extremely high-speed winds for a very small duration of time. Microbursts are generated
based on a probability Pburst for a random time duration between maximum and minimum
burst duration and with a random magnitude between maximum and minimum burst amplitude.

Here is an example plot of the generated wind speed with no storms or microbursts, with the
following settings: average wind speed: 10 miles per hour, gust value: 2 miles per hour,
simulation duration: 1 hour, time increment: 10 seconds. The data is shown in Figure 1.

[Figure]

An example of the wind speed generated data including three storms is shown in figure 2 (based
on the data generated in Figure 1). The example is generated using a 0.5% possibility of
encountering a storm, an average storm amplitude of 10 miles per hour, and a storm duration
of 5 minutes. 

[Figure]

An example of one microburst simulation added to the simulation of two storms is shown in
Figure 3.

[Figure]

Random numbers are generated by computers using specific algorithms. Now since the
outcome of algorithms can be predicted, these numbers are considered to be pseudo random
numbers and the software is called pseudo-random number generators. The problem with such
generators is that after a while their outcomes become very predictable which arises the
necessity of using truly random generators. Truly random number generators are created using
external fast changing data. For example, using the system time is one of the ways of generating
truly random numbers as it keeps changing every millisecond.

The condition that storms and microbursts happen are based on probability. This probability is
checked by generating random numbers between 0 and 1 and comparing it to the probability
given. If the condition is satisfied then the storms and microbursts are generated.

### Input Output Description
The program takes in the file named simulationConfiguration.txt as input. This file contains
data about the wind speed simulation parameters, storm and microburst generating data. The
output of the program consists of creation of four files. The first file WindSpeedData.txt
contains data about the generated randomized wind speed. The second file StormData.txt
contains the data about storms during different time intervals created based on the provided
storm parameters. The third file BurstData.txt contains data about microbursts during different
time intervals created based on the provided microburst parameters. The final file
WindSimulation.txt contains the cumulative data from all the other files and it basically stores
the entire wind simulation data. Further the data from each file is imported into excel and are
plotted to give separate graphs for wind speed, storm, burst and the cumulative wind simulation

## Test Cases
### Test Case 1: Low probability of storm and microburst
Average Wind Speed = 10, Gust value = 3, Simulation duration =
1000, Step size = 5, Storm probability (Pstorm) = 0.07, Minimum
storm amplitude = 25, Maximum storm amplitude = 35, Minimum
storm duration = 10, Max storm duration = 20, Microburst
probability (Pburst) = 0.07, Minimum Microburst Amplitude = 40,
Maximum Microburst Amplitude = 50, Minimum Microburst Duration
= 1, Maximum Microburst Duration = 5

In this case we are assigning a low probability of occurrence
to both storm and microburst. Therefore we will find a
considerably low number of storms and microbursts being
generated throughout the wind simulation.

### Test Case 2 - High probability of storm and microburst
Average Wind Speed = 12.5, Gust value = 2.5, Simulation duration
= 5000, Step size = 50, Storm probability (Pstorm) = 0.7, Minimum
storm amplitude = 28.9, Maximum storm amplitude = 32.8, Minimum
storm duration = 40, Max storm duration = 45.5, Microburst
probability (Pburst) = 0.8, Minimum Microburst Amplitude = 45,
Maximum Microburst Amplitude = 55, Minimum Microburst Duration
= 5, Maximum Microburst Duration = 10

In this case we are assigning a high probability of occurrence
to both storm and microburst. Therefore we will find a
considerably high number of storms and microbursts being
generated throughout the wind simulation.

### Test Case 3 - Low microburst probability and high storm probability
Average Wind Speed = 9, Gust value s= 3, Simulation duration =
200, Step size = 1, Storm probability (Pstorm) = 0.6, Minimum
storm amplitude = 36, Maximum storm amplitude = 40, Minimum 
storm duration = 10.8, Max storm duration = 20.8, Microburst
probability (Pburst) = 0.05, Minimum Microburst Amplitude = 50,
Maximum Microburst Amplitude = 56, Minimum Microburst Duration
= 2.5, Maximum Microburst Duration = 3.5

In this case we are assigning a low probability of occurrence
to microburst and a high probability to storms. Therefore even
though we will find a considerably high number of storms but
there would be very few microbursts being generated throughout
the wind simulation.

### Test Case 4 - High microburst probability and low storm probability
Average Wind Speed = 15.7, Gust value= 0.9, Simulation duration
= 999, Step size = 1.9, Storm probability (Pstorm) = 0.02,
Minimum storm amplitude = 20, Maximum storm amplitude = 36.8,
Minimum storm duration = 10, Max storm duration = 15, Microburst
probability (Pburst) = 0.8, Minimum Microburst Amplitude = 64.8,
Maximum Microburst Amplitude = 76.9, Minimum Microburst Duration
= 1.6, Maximum Microburst Duration = 2.1

In this case we are assigning a low probability of occurrence
to storms and a high probability to microbursts. Therefore even
though we will find a considerably low number of storms but
there would be many microbursts being generated during the
storms throughout the wind simulation.

### Test Case 5 - Zero Microburst Probability
Average Wind Speed = 9, Gust value = 3.89, Simulation duration
= 10, Step size = 0.01, Storm probability (Pstorm) = 0.8, Minimum
storm amplitude = 26.5, Maximum storm amplitude = 47.8, Minimum
storm duration = 0.5, Max storm duration = 0.8, Microburst
probability (Pburst) = 0, Minimum Microburst Amplitude = 69.8,
Maximum Microburst Amplitude = 96.8, Minimum Microburst Duration
= 0.01, Maximum Microburst Duration = 0.02

In this case we are assigning a zero probability of occurrence
to microburst. Therefore even though we will find storms but
there would be no microbursts being generated throughout the
wind simulation.

### Test Case 6 - Zero Storm Probability
Average Wind Speed = 20, Gust value = 1, Simulation duration =
500, Step size = 2.5, Storm probability (Pstorm) = 0, Minimum
storm amplitude = 50, Maximum storm amplitude = 60, Minimum
storm duration = 10, Max storm duration = 20, Microburst
probability (Pburst) = 0.9, Minimum Microburst Amplitude = 75,
Maximum Microburst Amplitude = 85, Minimum Microburst Duration
= 3.5, Maximum Microburst Duration = 5.5

In this case we are assigning a zero probability of occurrence
to storm. Since there are no storms that implies that there
won’t be any microbursts no matter what the probability of
occurrence of a microburst is. Therefore we won’t find any storms
or microbursts being generated throughout the wind simulation.

### Test Case 7 - 100% Storm Probability
Average Wind Speed = 13, Gust value = 6.6, Simulation duration
= 600 , Step size = 6, Storm probability (Pstorm) = 1, Minimum
storm amplitude = 20.4, Maximum storm amplitude = 24, Minimum
storm duration = 15, Max storm duration = 20, Microburst
probability (Pburst) = 0.3, Minimum Microburst Amplitude = 40,
Maximum Microburst Amplitude = 70, Minimum Microburst Duration
= 3, Maximum Microburst Duration = 5

In this case we are assigning a 1 probability of occurrence to
storm - sure event. Therefore we will find storms being generated
throughout the wind simulation at every time step.

### Test Case 8 - 100% Microburst Probability
Average Wind Speed = 11.11, Gust value = 3, Simulation duration
= 1111, Step size = 11, Storm probability (Pstorm) = 0.4, Minimum
storm amplitude = 22, Maximum storm amplitude = 33, Minimum
storm duration = 2.2, Max storm duration = 22, Microburst
probability (Pburst) = 1, Minimum Microburst Amplitude = 44.44,
Maximum Microburst Amplitude = 55.55, Minimum Microburst
Duration = 1.1, Maximum Microburst Duration = 2.2

In this case we are assigning a 1 probability of occurrence to
microburst - sure event. Therefore wherever there is a storm we
will always encounter a microburst throughout the duration of
the storm.

## Software Verification and Testing
For all the graphs attached below the x axis denotes time (in seconds) and y axis denotes
windspeed(in mph)

[To be added]

## User Guide
This program will generate a wind simulation based on the several parameters fed to it. The
program takes in a file containing all these parameters as input. The user has to provide
important information like average wind speed, gust value, time duration for the simulation
they require, step size, probability of storm and microburst happening, maximum and minimum
storm/microburst magnitude and duration in the form of an input file. The wind simulation will
then be modelled by the software based on these parameters and the resultant files of wind
speed, storms, microburst and the overall wind simulation will be provided to the user as
output. The user can further go on to import and plot this data into a graph using excel.
